onchain-development intro-to-onchain updated (#344)
solana-foundation/developer-content: content/courses/onchain-development/intro-to-onchain.md

---
title: Intro to Solana Onchain Development
objectives:
  - Understand how Solana onchain programs work
  - Know about the structure and operation of Solana programs
  - Build a basic program
description:
  "Discover how onchain programs ( often called 'smart contracts') work on
  Solana and learn to build your own."
---

## Summary

> - **Onchain programs** refers to the code that run directly on Solana.

Author: it has a good sound to it. the analogy makes it a bit easier to imagine programs

- These programs consist of **instruction handlers** - functions that process
  instructions from transactions.
- Programs interact with the blockchain by reading from and writing to Solana
  **accounts**.
- Solana programs are most commonly written in **Rust**, often using the
  **Anchor** framework for simplified development.
- Anchor generates **Interface Description Language (IDL)** files, which:
  - Describe the program's structure and functionality
  - Enable automatic creation of JavaScript/TypeScript client libraries
- Solana's architecture allows for parallel execution of non-overlapping
  transactions, contributing to its high speed and efficiency.
- Rent is a concept in Solana where accounts must maintain a minimum balance to

>   stay alive on the blockchain.

Reviewer: This is all great (no feedback, just saying).

Author: thanks

## Overview

Solana operates on various clusters, each functioning as a unified, globally
synchronized system:

- **mainnet-beta**: The main production network
- **testnet**: For testing new features
- **devnet**: For application development
- **localnet**: For local testing

The program that run on Solana - the ones that create tokens, swap tokens, art
marketplaces, escrows, market makers, DePIN apps, auctions, retail payments
platforms, etc - are called **Solana apps**.

The most popular way to build onchain apps is using **Rust** language and the
**Anchor** framework. There is also another way of developing Solana programs
that is, by using the **native onchain program development**, however **Anchor**
makes things a lot simpler and safer. Some pros of using Anchor are:

- Security checks are implemented automatically

> - Instruction routing to appropriate handlers
> - Data serialization and deserialization from incoming transactions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Automatic routing of incoming instructions to the correct instruction handler
- Automatic serialization and deserialization of the data inside transactions
```

---
title: Intro to Solana Onchain Development
objectives:
  - Understand how Solana onchain programs work
  - Know about the structure and operation of Solana programs
  - Build a basic program
description:
  "Discover how onchain programs ( often called 'smart contracts') work on
  Solana and learn to build your own."
---

## Summary

> - **Onchain programs** run directly on Solana, just like programs on your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Onchain programs** (sometimes called 'smart contracts') run directly on Solana, just like programs on your
```

Reviewer: We recently started to use 'smart contract' just for SEO and recognizability purposes.

Instruction handlers are how blockchain programs process the instructions from
clients. Every exchange, lending protocol, escrow, oracle, etc. provides their
functionality by instruction handlers. They enable program to process complex

> financial operations on Solana.

Reviewer: Not sure re: "They enable program to process complex financial operations on Solana." - people already know this based on the previous sentence.

Author: y; that might be a bit redundant

But more importantly, programs on Solana can create additional addresses as
needed, to store items of data.

> This approach allows Solana programs to maintain complex states and interact
> with various types of data, all within the blockchain's account structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is how Solana programs store their state.
```

Try and keep it plain.

### Program Derived Addresses (PDAs): Solana's Key-Value Store

Data for Solana programs are stored in **program-derived addresses (PDAs)**.
Solana's PDAs can be thought of as a **key/value store**. A PDA can be designed

> to store any form of data as required by the program.

Reviewer: This is good (no feedback just saying).

#### Key Concepts

1. **Structure**

   - **Key**: The PDA's address
   - **Value**: Data stored in the account at that address

2. **Address Generation**

   - **Seed**: chosen by the programmer
   - **Bump**: An additional value to ensure unique PDA creation
   - **Deterministic**: Same combination of seed and bump always produce the
     same address. This helps the program and the client to accurately determine
     the address of the data.

3. **Data Storage**

   - Programmers define the structure of data stored in PDAs
   - Can store any type of program-specific information

4. **Some properties**:

>    - PDAs are off the ED25519 elliptic curve so they are not `KeyPairs` like
>      traditional accounts on Solana, they only have a `PublicKey`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - PDAs are off the Ed25519 elliptic curve. While the data type web3.js uses is a `PublicKey`, PDA addresses are not public keys and do not have a matching private key. 
```
